README.md, before:

# fml (Fast MARC Library)

[![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/MITLibraries/fml?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/MITLibraries/fml)

fml is a Go library for parsing MARC 21 formatted data. The library interface should still be considered unstable and may change in backwards incompatible ways.

There is also an `fml` command line utility that can be used to pull a single MARC record from a file by control number. The command can be installed with:

```
$ go get github.com/mitlibraries/fml/cmd/fml
```

## How do I use this?

```go
import "github.com/mitlibraries/fml"
```

Start by creating a new `MarcIterator`:

```go
m := fml.NewMarcIterator(<io.Reader>)
```

A `MarcIterator` can be iterated over by using the `Next()` and `Value()` methods. This is mostly just a thin wrapper around a `bufio.Scanner`. `Next()` returns false when there is no more data to process or an unrecoverable error has occured. In this case, iteration will stop and the error will be available from the `Err()` method:

```go
for m.Next() {
  record, err := m.Value()
  // do something with record
}
err := m.Err()
if err != nil {
  // do something with error
}
```

A `Record` contains a leader struct and a slice of all the control and data fields. If you want to iterate over this slice you will need to use a type switch to determine the type of field. There are a few convenience methods that are probably better for accessing specific fields, though.

The `ControlField` method returns a slice of control fields. A control field contains a tag and a value:

```go
for _, cf := range record.ControlField("001", "003") {
  fmt.Printf("%s: %s\n", cf.Tag, cf.Value)
}
```

The `DataField` method returns a slice of data fields. A data field has two indicators, a tag and a slice of subfields. The subfields themselves have a code and a value. There's also a `SubField` method that returns a slice of specified subfields:

```go
for _, df := range record.DataField("260") {
  fmt.Printf("%s: %s %s\n", df.Tag, df.Indicator1, df.Indicator2)
  for _, sf := range df.SubField("a", "b") {
    fmt.Printf("\t%s: %s\n", sf.Code, sf.Value)
  }
}
```

There is also `Filter` method inspired by [traject](https://github.com/traject/traject). `Filter` takes one or more query strings consisting of a three digit MARC tag optionally followed by an indicator filter and/or one or more subfield codes. If no subfields are specified, all subfields for the matching tag are returned. The indicator filter consists of two indicator codes between pipes. A `*` character can be used to match any indicator code. Here are a few examples of valid query strings:

```
200
500|02|
650x
245|*1|ac
```

`Filter` returns a slice of string slices. Each slice member represents an instance of a matching tag and a slice of all the matching subfields, or data values in the case of control fields. For example, take a MARC record with the following structure:

```
245 $a Tomb of Annihilation
650 $a Dungeons and Dragons (Game) $v Handbooks, manuals, etc.
650 $a Dungeons and Dragons (Game) $v Rules.
```

The following code:

```go
for _, t := range record.Filter("245", "650v") {
  for _, v := range t {
    fmt.Println(v)
  }
}
```

outputs:

```
Tomb of Annihilation
Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Rules.
```

Commit message:

Update to Go modules for dependencies
This updates to Go version 1.13.x and drops dep in favor of the new
modules. I don't fully understand why, but it's much more strict about
case in package names than previously. I've chosen to use lowercase
throughout as this seems like the best policy.

In order to start using modules on this project you should move the
repo to outside of your GOPATH (GOPATH is no longer needed for modules).
Running commands like `build` or `test` will automatically fetch any
missing dependencies. You can also delete the vendor directory.

README.md, after:

# fml (Fast MARC Library)

[![GoDoc](https://godoc.org/github.com/mitlibraries/fml?status.svg)](https://godoc.org/github.com/mitlibraries/fml)

fml is a Go library for parsing MARC 21 formatted data. The library interface should still be considered unstable and may change in backwards incompatible ways.

There is also an `fml` command line utility that can be used to pull a single MARC record from a file by control number. The command can be installed with:

```
$ go get github.com/mitlibraries/fml/cmd/fml
```

## How do I use this?

```go
import "github.com/mitlibraries/fml"
```

Start by creating a new `MarcIterator`:

```go
m := fml.NewMarcIterator(<io.Reader>)
```

A `MarcIterator` can be iterated over by using the `Next()` and `Value()` methods. This is mostly just a thin wrapper around a `bufio.Scanner`. `Next()` returns false when there is no more data to process or an unrecoverable error has occured. In this case, iteration will stop and the error will be available from the `Err()` method:

```go
for m.Next() {
  record, err := m.Value()
  // do something with record
}
err := m.Err()
if err != nil {
  // do something with error
}
```

A `Record` contains a leader struct and a slice of all the control and data fields. If you want to iterate over this slice you will need to use a type switch to determine the type of field. There are a few convenience methods that are probably better for accessing specific fields, though.

The `ControlField` method returns a slice of control fields. A control field contains a tag and a value:

```go
for _, cf := range record.ControlField("001", "003") {
  fmt.Printf("%s: %s\n", cf.Tag, cf.Value)
}
```

The `DataField` method returns a slice of data fields. A data field has two indicators, a tag and a slice of subfields. The subfields themselves have a code and a value. There's also a `SubField` method that returns a slice of specified subfields:

```go
for _, df := range record.DataField("260") {
  fmt.Printf("%s: %s %s\n", df.Tag, df.Indicator1, df.Indicator2)
  for _, sf := range df.SubField("a", "b") {
    fmt.Printf("\t%s: %s\n", sf.Code, sf.Value)
  }
}
```

There is also `Filter` method inspired by [traject](https://github.com/traject/traject). `Filter` takes one or more query strings consisting of a three digit MARC tag optionally followed by an indicator filter and/or one or more subfield codes. If no subfields are specified, all subfields for the matching tag are returned. The indicator filter consists of two indicator codes between pipes. A `*` character can be used to match any indicator code. Here are a few examples of valid query strings:

```
200
500|02|
650x
245|*1|ac
```

`Filter` returns a slice of string slices. Each slice member represents an instance of a matching tag and a slice of all the matching subfields, or data values in the case of control fields. For example, take a MARC record with the following structure:

```
245 $a Tomb of Annihilation
650 $a Dungeons and Dragons (Game) $v Handbooks, manuals, etc.
650 $a Dungeons and Dragons (Game) $v Rules.
```

The following code:

```go
for _, t := range record.Filter("245", "650v") {
  for _, v := range t {
    fmt.Println(v)
  }
}
```

outputs:

```
Tomb of Annihilation
Handbooks, manuals, etc.
Rules.
```

## Developing

This package uses modules for managing dependencies. Use:

```
$ go get -u ./...
```

to upgrade all minor/patch versions of dependencies.

Tests can be run with:

```
$ go test -v ./...
```

Benchmarks can be run with:

```
$ go test -bench=.
```
